>> Hari Sreenivasan: ON THIS
EDITION FOR SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER
27...
NEW AIR STRIKES ON ISLAMIC STATE
POSITIONS.
WE’LL DISSECT THE SITUATION ON
THE BATTLEFIELD THROUGHOUT SYRIA
AND IRAQ.
AND ON THIS AMERICAN GRADUATE
DAY, WILL AN EXTRA HOUR OF
READING HELP UNDERPERFORMING
STUDENTS?
AND IS IT THE ROLE OF STATES TO
MANDATE IT?
>> THIS IS THE MECHANISM THAT
WILL HELP CLOSE THAT GAP BETWEEN
THE STUDENTS THAT ARE LIVING IN
POVERTY AND STUDENTS THAT ARE
NOT LIVING IN POVERTY.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
BECAUSE OF WNET’S AMERICAN
GRADUATE DAY INITIATIVE, WE ARE
COMING TO YOU TONIGHT FROM
ANOTHER STUDIO IN NEW YORK CITY.
WARPLANES FROM THE UNITED STATES
AND ALLIED NATIONS STRUCK
ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS TODAY IN
A TOWN NEAR THE SYRIAN-TURKISH
BORDER.
THE JIHADISTS HAVE BEEN BATTLING
KURDISH FORCES THERE, CAUSING
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF SYRIANS
TO FLEE INTO TURKEY.
TWO ISIS TANKS REPORTEDLY WERE
DESTROYED DURING TODAY’S ALLIED
BOMBINGS.
BUT ISIS FIGHTERS LATER SHELLED
THE TOWN, WOUNDING SEVERAL
CITIZENS.
TODAY, FOR THE FIRST TIME,
BRITISH FIGHTER JETS FLEW
MISSIONS OVER NORTHERN IRAQ.
WE’LL HAVE MUCH MORE ON THE
CONFLICT IN A MOMENT.
IN HONG KONG TODAY, POLICE
ARRESTED SEVERAL DOZEN PRO-
DEMOCRACY DEMONSTRATORS WHO HAD
SCALED A FENCE AND OCCUPIED A
PLAZA OUTSIDE A GOVERNMENT
BUILDING.
THE WEEK-LONG PROTESTS FOLLOWED
A RULING THAT THE CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT IN BEIJING WOULD HAVE
TO APPROVE ALL CANDIDATES
SEEKING TO BECOME HONG KONG’S
CHIEF EXECUTIVE.
THOUSANDS OF OTHERS GATHERED
NEAR THE SCENE AND CHANTED IN
SUPPORT OF THE DEMONSTRATORS.
IN EGYPT TODAY, HOSNI MUBARAK
WAS TAKEN BY STRETCHER INTO A
COURTROOM TO HEAR WHETHER HE
WOULD BE HELD RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE DEATH OF MORE THAN 800
PROTESTERS DURING THE 2011
UPRISING THAT LED TO HIS OUSTER,
BUT THE VERDICT WAS DELAYED.
THE 86-YEAR-OLD WAS CONVICTED
AND SENTENCED TO LIFE IN 2012 ON
THE SAME CHARGES BUT THE CASE
WAS RECENTLY RE-TRIED.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, CARBON
EMISSIONS ARE ON THE RISE.
DATA RELEASED YESTERDAY BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY SHOWED A
2.7% INCREASE DURING THE FIRST
SIX MONTHS OF 2014 COMPARED TO
THE SAME PERIOD LAST YEAR.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, THE PRESIDENT
TOUTED AMERICA’S REDUCED CARBON
EMISSIONS BUT SAID THE NATION
NEEDED TO DO MORE.
THE INCREASE IS WIDELY
ATTRIBUTED TO GROWING ECONOMIC
ACTIVITY AT THE NATION’S
FACTORIES.
THE WHITE HOUSE IS REPORTEDLY
PREPARING AN EXECUTIVE ORDER
THAT WOULD REQUIRE ALL FEDERAL
AGENCIES TO DISCLOSE WHERE THEY
FLY DRONES IN THIS COUNTRY AND
WHAT THEY ARE DOING WITH THE
DATA THEY GATHER.
THE ORDER WOULD NOT AFFECT
MILITARY AND INTELLIGENCE
OPERATIONS OVERSEAS.
ALL THIS ACCORDING TO A REPORT
IN THEWASHINGTON POST.
MORE THAN 700 FLIGHTS IN AND OUT
OF CHICAGO WERE CANCELED TODAY,
STILL A SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT
OVER YESTERDAY WHEN AN ESTIMATED
2,000 FLIGHTS TO AND FROM O’HARE
AND MIDWAY WERE GROUNDED.
THIS WAS THE SCENE DEPICTED IN
THE SKIES OVER THE CHICAGO AREA
YESTERDAY MORNING.
THIS IS WHAT IT LOOKED LIKE
TODAY.
THE DISRUPTION WAS CAUSED BY A
FIRE AT AN AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL
CENTER-- A FIRE APPARENTLY SET
BY A DISGRUNTLED EMPLOYEE WHO
LATER REPORTEDLY TRIED TO KILL
HIMSELF.
A 54 YEAR-OLD MENTALLY ILL
INMATE WHO HAD BEEN HELD IN
SOLITARY CONFINEMENT IN A NORTH
CAROLINA PRISON FOR MORE THAN A
MONTH DIED OF DEHYDRATION, THIS
ACCORDING TO PRISON RECORDS
OBTAINED BY THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
THE SAME RECORDS SAID THE
INMATE, A DIAGNOSED
SCHIZOPHRENIC, HAD FLOODED HIS
CELL TWICE.
PRISON OFFICIALS ARE ALLOWED TO
TURN OFF THE WATER IN CELLS, BUT
THEY HAVEN’T SAID WHETHER THEY
DID SO IN THE DAYS BEFORE THE
INMATE DIED.
SINCE THE DEATH LAST MARCH,
SEVEN PRISON EMPLOYEES HAVE BEEN
FIRED OR HAVE RESIGNED.
AND HEALTH OFFICIALS ARE
INVESTIGATING WHETHER
ENTEROVIRUS 68 IS LINKED TO
POLIO-LIKE SYMPTOMS NOW
AFFLICTING NINE CHILDREN IN
COLORADO.
PRELIMINARY TESTS FOUND THAT
FOUR OF THE NINE HAD THE VIRUS.
MORE THAN 275 PEOPLE IN 40
STATES HAVE BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH
THE VIRUS, WHICH TYPICALLY
CAUSES RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS AND
HIGH FEVER.
>> Sreenivasan: TO TRY TO GIVE
YOU AN OVERALL PICTURE OF THE
SITUATION ON THE BATTLEFIELD
THROUGHOUT IRAQ AND SYRIA, WE
ARE JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON
BY ANTHONY CORDESMAN.
HE IS WITH THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AND WAS THE DIRECTOR OF
INTELLIGENCE ASSESSMENT IN THE
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE.
SO LET’S START IN NORTHEASTERN
SYRIA, WHERE THE U.S. HAS BEEN
STRIKING ISLAMIC STATE POSITIONS
NEAR ITS HEADQUARTERS IN RAQQA,
AND WHERE INTENSE FIGHTING HAS
OCCURRED THIS WEEK BETWEEN
KURDISH FORCES AND ISIS IN
KOBANE NEAR THE TURKISH BORDER.
WHAT’S THE LATEST FROM SYRIA?
>> THE NUMBER OF STRIKES HAVE
BEEN RELATIVELY LIMITED.
THIS IS NOT, AS YET, AN
INTENSIVE AIR CAMPAIGN, PROBABLY
AROUND 250 STRIKES, AND A LITTLE
OVER 40 CRUISE MISSILES.
THE AREA IN THE TURKISH BORDER
IS A PARTICULARLY TROUBLED AREA
BECAUSE THE ISLAMIC STATE IS
PUSHING HARD TO ESSENTIALLY PUSH
THE SYRIAN KURDS OUT OF THE AREA
TO TAKE CONTROL OF THE BORDER
AREAS WITH TURKEY.
THAT GIVES THEM LEVERAGE OVER
TURKEY.
IT’S PUSHING OUT AN OPPONENT
WHICH HAD BEEN ALLIED WITH THE
IRAQI KURDS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THERE HAVE
BEEN STRIKES INSIDE SYRIA WHICH
HAVE ATTACKED KEY COMMAND POSTS,
REFINERIES, THE ECONOMIC
LIFELINE TO THE ISLAMIC STATES.
BUT THESE ARE STILL EARLY DAYS.
IT’S NOT YET AN INTENSIVE OR
SUSTAINED CAMPAIGN THAT’S GOING
TO MAKE A CRITICAL DIFFERENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW ABOUT THE
SITUATION IN NORTHERN IRAQ?
A LOT OF AMERICANS ARE FAMILIAR
WITH THE RESCUE OPERATION THAT
WE PARTICIPATED IN TO TRY TO
HELP THE YAZIDIS GET
OFF THE SINJAR MOUNTAIN AREA.
BUT ISIS STILL CONTROLS MOSUL
AND MUCH OF THAT REGION.
>> NO ONE HAS SUGGESTED AT ANY
POINT IN THE ADMINISTRATION OR
IN THE U.S. JOINT CHIEFS THAT
THESE AIRSTRIKES ARE GOING TO
DRIVE THE ISLAMIC STATE OUT OF
NORTHERN AND WESTERN IRAQ.
SO FAR, THE AIRSTRIKES, WHEN
THEY’VE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN IRAQ,
HAVE LARGELY BEEN CLOSE-AIR
SUPPORT, SUPPORT REALLY HELPING
SPECIFIC IRAQI OR KURDISH FORCES
THAT WERE THREATENED BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
THERE HAVE ONLY BEEN TWO VERY
MINOR ATTEMPTS AT A
COUNTER-OFFENSIVE TO DRIVE
INSIDE.
THE AREAS OCCUPIED THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AND BOTH OF THESE HAVE
REALLY FAILED.
AND IN AREAS WHERE THERE HAVE
BEEN SOME GAINS IN HOLDING THE
OFFENSIVES, YOU STILL SEE THE
ISLAMIC STATE FIND OTHER WAYS TO
GO ON THE OFFENSIVE AGAINST
OTHER TOWNS AND PLACES.
>> ISIS ALSO CONTROLS SEVERAL
CITIES WITHIN ABOUT 50 MILES OF
BAGHDAD, AND THIS WEEK WE HEARD
NEW REPORTS ABOUT THEIR FIGHTERS
DEFEATING IRAQI GOVERNMENT
TROOPS EVEN CLOSER TO THE
CAPITAL, SO, MY QUESTION IS, IS
BAGHDAD ITSELF IN ANY DANGER?
>> MOST OF WHAT WE’RE SEEING ARE
ATTACKING OF SMALL TOWNS ALONG
THE RIVER THAT WERE HELD BY
SMALL, ISOLATED IRAQI ARMY
GARRISONS.
SOME OF THESE HAD 400, SOME OF
THEM HAD 800 PEOPLE.
THEY’RE NOT IN THE SHIITE AREAS.
THEY’RE NOT IN THE URBAN AREAS
IN BAGHDAD.
THEY’RE NOT DEALING WITH THE
LARGER IRAQI FORCES.
BUT IT IS DISTURBING THAT THESE
HAVE BEEN GAINS THAT ARE TO THE
WEST, TO SOME EXTENT TO THE
IMMEDIATE SOUTH, AND IN A FEW
AREAS TO THE NORTH OF BAGHDAD.
YES, THEY’RE STILL IN RURAL
AREAS, BUT IN EACH CASE WHERE
THERE’S BEEN A PUSH AGAINST THE
IRAQI FORCES, THEY HAVEN’T BEEN
SUPPLIED, AREAS OR ATTEMPTS TO
RELIEVE THEM UNDER PRESSURE
HAVEN’T WORKED.
THEY’VE APPEALED FOR SUPPORT
FROM THE IRAQI FORCES.
THEY’VE BEEN GIVEN ALL KINDS OF
PROMISES, AND NOTHING HAS BEEN
DELIVERED.
AND THIS REFLECTS A MUCH BROADER
ISSUE.
THE U.S. ASSESSMENTS ARE THAT
THERE ARE ABOUT 26 BRIGADES--
THAT’S A LARGE FORCE-- STILL
LEFT IN THE IRAQI FORCES.
IT’S ALSO THAT ABOUT HALF
OF THOSE ARE SECTARIAN, OR
SHIITE.
THEY’RE NOT REALLY
SUPPORTING THE NATIONAL FORCES
OR THEY’RE SIMPLY NOT MILITARILY
EFFECTIVE.
AND VIRTUALLY ALL OF
THE OTHERS ARE GOING TO REQUIRE
ADVISORY SUPPORT, ARMS SUPPLIES,
BETTER COMMAND AND CONTROL, TO
BE EFFECTIVE SO AS YET, WE’RE
HOLDING BUT THE AIRSTRIKES ARE
NOT REALLY CRIPPLING THE ISLAMIC
STATE IN ANY MEANINGFUL WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ANTHONY
CORDESMAN JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> A PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
ON THIS AMERICAN GRADUATE DAY,
WE EXAMINE A ONE-OF-A-KIND
PROGRAM IN THE NATION TO HELP
BOOST READING SKILLS.
FLORIDA NOW REQUIRES ITS 300
LOWEST-PERFORMING ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS TO ADD AN HOUR TO THEIR
SCHOOL DAY, AN HOUR FOCUSED ON
READING, AND NOTHING ELSE.
AS YOU’D EXPECT, A LIVELY DEBATE
IS UNDERWAY ABOUT THE WISDOM AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PLAN.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT ALISON
STEWART REPORTS FROM ORANGE
COUNTY IN CENTRAL FLORIDA.
>> Reporter: JAYLON JENKINS JUST
STARTED SECOND GRADE.
AND EVERY DAY AFTER SCHOOL HE
DOES HOMEWORK WITH HIS AUNT AND
GUARDIAN ANTONIA WILLIAMS.
>> REMEMBER, WE TALKED ABOUT THE
TENSES, FROM RIDE TO...
>> R-O-D-E.
>> I’M NOT A TYRANT.
WHEN HE FIRST COMES HOME I
NORMALLY HAVE...
LET HIM HAVE A 20-MINUTE BREAK.
HE GETS A SNACK.
>> YOU WANT APPLE?
>> AND THEN WE START HIS
HOMEWORK.
I’LL GIVE HIM A BREAK IN BETWEEN
BECAUSE IT’S A LOT FOR A SECOND
GRADER TO RETAIN AND TO
COMPREHEND, SO THIS IS OUR...
THIS IS OUR DAILY SCHEDULE.
>> Reporter: A SCHEDULE THAT
ALREADY INCLUDES AN EXTRA HOUR
OF READING, AND ONLY READING FOR
JAYLON AND FOR EVERY OTHER
STUDENT AT HIS SCHOOL,
PHILLIS WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL IN APOPKA, FLORIDA, JUST
NORTHWEST OF ORLANDO IN ORANGE
COUNTY.
>> ANTONIA, WHAT DID YOU THINK
WHEN YOU FIRST HEARD THAT
JAYLON’S SCHOOL WAS GOING TO
REQUIRE ONE EXTRA HOUR OF
READING AT SCHOOL EVERY DAY.
>> I WAS LIKE, "YES."
>> Reporter: YEAH?
>> I WAS, LIKE, "YES."
I MEAN, WHAT ELSE WOULD A CHILD
BE DOING THAT HOUR AFTER SCHOOL,
YOU KNOW?
YES, IT WOULD BE A LONGER DAY
AND I WAS CONCERNED ABOUT HIM
BEING FOCUSED AND STAYING ON
TASK FOR SUCH A LONG TIME.
BUT HE’S IN A STRUCTURED
ENVIRONMENT.
YOU KNOW, IT’S NOT LIKE THEY’RE
ON THE PLAYGROUND FOR AN EXTRA
HOUR.
THEY’RE READING.
>> Reporter: HAS HE ASKED YOU
WHY HE STAYS AN EXTRA HOUR?
>> I DON’T EVEN THINK HE
REALIZES IT.
>> Reporter: THE EXTRA HOUR OF
READING AT WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY
IS NOT VOLUNTARY.
THIS SCHOOL YEAR IN FLORIDA, THE
300 LOWEST-PERFORMING ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS ARE REQUIRED TO ADD AN
HOUR OF READING INSTRUCTION,
A RANKING DETERMINED BY THE
STATE’S STANDARDIZED READING
TEST.
IT IS ESTIMATED TO COST JUST
OVER $5 MILLION FOR THE 20
TRADITIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOLS
REQUIRED TO ADD THE HOUR IN
ORANGE COUNTY, THE 10TH LARGEST
SCHOOL DISTRICT IN THE COUNTRY.
IT’S AN EXPANSION OF A LAW
PASSED IN 2012 THAT FOCUSED ON
THE 100 LOWEST-PERFORMING
SCHOOLS.
AND THAT INCLUDED PHILLIS
WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY.
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK IT IS?
>> Reporter: SEAN BROWN IS THE
SCHOOL’S PRINCIPAL.
>> ONCE WE HIT THAT LAST HOUR OF
THE DAY, IT’S STRICTLY READING.
>> Reporter: FROM FOURTH GRADERS
WORKING ON READING COMPREHENSION
QUESTIONS...
>> WE COULD ELIMINATE
UNDERGROUND...
>> Reporter: TO FIRST GRADERS
JUST LEARNING THE BASICS.
>> THEY GET DARKER AND DARKER...
>> Reporter: STUDENTS, TAUGHT BY
TEACHERS FROM THE SCHOOL...
>> HARE...
>> Reporter: ...READ, READ, AND
READ SOME MORE.
>> WE WANT TO HONE IN ON THE
READING SKILLS AND THEN JUST
PUSH THE STUDENTS ACADEMICALLY
AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: A HIGH-POVERTY
SCHOOL WHERE ALL STUDENTS GET
FREE BREAKFAST AND LUNCH,
PHILLIS WHEATLEY ELEMENTARY IS
IN A NEIGHBORHOOD WITH A HIGH
CRIME RATE, AND IS THE TYPE OF
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS THINK
COULD PARTICULARLY BENEFIT FROM
THE EXTRA READING TIME.
>> DO YOU THINK YOUR STUDENTS
NEED THIS EXTRA HOUR?
>> YES, I DO.
>> Reporter: WHY IS THAT?
IS IT BECAUSE THEY’RE SO FAR
BEHIND?
IS IT JUST NOT ENOUGH TIME
DURING THE DAY TO TEACH THESE
KIDS?
>> THERE’S SEVERAL REASONS.
I KNOW THAT WITH POVERTY, A LOT
OF OUR STUDENTS, THEY’RE SO MUCH
FURTHER BEHIND A STUDENT THAT
HAS TWO PARENTS OR A STUDENT
THAT HAS A HIGH WORKING-CLASS
FAMILY.
SO THIS IS THE MECHANISM THAT
WILL HELP CLOSE THAT GAP BETWEEN
THE STUDENTS THAT ARE LIVING IN
POVERTY AND STUDENTS THAT ARE
NOT LIVING IN POVERTY.
>> Reporter: AND PRINCIPAL BROWN
IS CONVINCED IT WORKS.
AFTER A YEAR WITH THE BONUS HOUR
IN 2012, WHEATLEY SAW THE
PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN READING
AT GRADE LEVEL OR ABOVE INCREASE
BY 58%.
ACROSS THE STATE NEARLY THREE-
QUARTERS OF THE SCHOOLS WITH THE
EXTRA HOUR SHOWED AN INCREASE IN
STUDENTS READING AT GRADE LEVEL.
>> THE RESULTS HAVE TURNED OUT
TO BE DRAMATIC.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN STATE
SENATOR DAVID SIMMONS IS THE
FORCE BEHIND THE STATE LAW
ADDING THE EXTRA HOUR.
THE SON OF TWO PUBLIC SCHOOL
TEACHERS, HE SAYS HE FIRST HEARD
ABOUT ADDING EXTRA TIME FROM A
PRINCIPAL AT A STRUGGLING
ORLANDO SCHOOL.
>> IN TALKING TO HIM HE
SAID, "IF I JUST HAD MORE TIME
WITH THESE CHILDREN, I COULD
MAKE A BIG, BIG DIFFERENCE WITH
THEM."
AND HE SAID, "IT’S NOT THAT THEY
CAN’T LEARN, IT’S THEY DON’T
HAVE ENOUGH TIME TO LEARN."
BUT IT HAS TO BE DONE RIGHT.
ALISON, YOU CAN’T HAVE PIZZA
PARTIES DURING THAT EXTRA HOUR.
YOU HAVE TO DO IT AT THE RIGHT
TIME.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE DEDICATED
TEACHERS WHO KNOW WHAT THEY’RE
DOING.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE A SCHOOL SYSTEM
THAT IS BEHIND IT.
>> Reporter: SENATOR SIMMONS
SAYS EXPANDING THE NUMBER OF
SCHOOLS FROM 100 TO 300 HELPS
ENSURE SCHOOLS AREN’T PENALIZED
BY LOSING THE EXTRA HOUR AFTER
THEIR SCORES IMPROVE.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU FIRST
PRESENTED THE IDEA OF THIS
ADDITIONAL HOUR OF READING TO
YOUR COLLEAGUES, WHAT KIND OF
QUESTIONS DID THEY HAVE FOR YOU?
>> THE NATURAL QUESTIONS.
AND THE IMPORTANT QUESTIONS.
IS IT GOING TO WORK?
>> Reporter: MAKE THE CASE FOR
ME.
>> OKAY, CERTAINLY.
OTHER NATIONS, INDUSTRIALIZED
NATIONS, SEND THEIR CHILDREN TO
SCHOOL SIGNIFICANTLY LONGER
THAN WE DO HERE ON AVERAGE IN
THE IN THE UNITED STATES.
WE’RE TALKING ABOUT TRYING TO
CRAM A HUGE AMOUNT OF
INFORMATION INTO THE MINDS OF
THESE CHILDREN IN A LIMITED
AMOUNT OF TIME.
IT’S LIKE TRYING TO PUT 25
POUNDS OF SUGAR IN A 10 POUND
SACK.
>> SENATOR SIMMONS IS LOOKING AT
A PIECE OF FOOL’S GOLD AND HE
BELIEVES IT’S REAL GENUINE GOLD.
>> Reporter: RICK ROACH IS ONE
OF EIGHT ELECTED SCHOOL BOARD
MEMBERS IN ORANGE COUNTY.
A TEACHER AND GUIDANCE COUNSELOR
FOR 14 YEARS IN THE COUNTY,
ROACH ALSO TRAINED TEACHERS
AROUND THE COUNTRY AND HAS
SERVED ON THE SCHOOL BOARD SINCE
1998.
HE’S NOT CONVINCED THAT THE
EXTRA MANDATED TIME IS THE
SOLUTION THAT IT SEEMS.
>> I DON’T THINK IT HAS TRUE
EDUCATIONAL VALUE.
AND I THINK IT COULD BE MORE
HELPFUL IF YOU JUST TAKE YOUR
EYES OFF OF A TEST SCORE.
IT DOESN’T NECESSARILY MEAN THAT
THAT CHILD COMES OUT OF THERE A
BETTER READER OR HAS DEVELOPED A
LOVE OF READING.
IT SIMPLY MEANS THEY’VE JAMMED
UP A RAW SCORE ON A SINGLE
MEASURE TEST.
>> Reporter: AND THERE’S THE
QUESTION: WHO GETS TO DECIDE THE
BEST WAY TO HELP KIDS LEARN?
WHAT WAS THE DEBATE LIKE OR THE
DISCUSSION LIKE WHEN IT FIRST
CAME UP, "SHOULD WE HAVE KIDS
READ FOR AN EXTRA HOUR AFTER
SCHOOL?"
>> PLEASE...
(laughing)
I HAVE TO LAUGH AT THAT ONE.
THERE WAS NO DEBATE ON THAT.
THERE WAS SIMPLY...
THE COMMAND CAME DOWN FROM THE
HILL, "THOU SHALT PUT AN EXTRA
HOUR INTO THE SCHOOL."
THERE WAS NO DEBATE, THE BOARD
DIDN’T DISCUSS THAT.
LOCAL... THERE WAS NO LOCAL
FEEDBACK INTO THAT.
NOT TO MENTION THE FACT THAT
MANY PEOPLE WHO MAKE THESE LAWS
NEVER TAUGHT ONE DAY IN A
CLASSROOM.
I WOULDN’T FOR A MINUTE SERVE ON
AN AVIATION BOARD OR A MEDICAL
BOARD.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE OTHER
CONCERNS AS WELL: DISTRICT
OFFICIALS FIND OUT WHICH SCHOOLS
ARE REQUIRED TO ADD THE EXTRA
READING HOUR JUST WEEKS BEFORE
SCHOOL STARTS.
BUS SCHEDULES HAVE TO CHANGE AND
TEACHING STAFF SECURED.
SOME PARENTS VOICED CONCERN OVER
THE EXHAUSTION LEVEL OF KIDS
WHOSE DAYS ARE PUSHED AN HOUR
LATER.
AND THE REDUCTION OF FAMILY
TIME.
AND WHILE KIDS WHO SCORED THE
HIGHEST LEVEL ON THE READING
SECTION OF THE STATE’S
STANDARDIZED TEST CAN OPT OUT,
FOR THE MOST PART, EVERYONE IS
REQUIRED TO STAY THE EXTRA HOUR.
SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER RICK ROACH
QUESTIONS WHETHER IT REALLY
WORKS.
HE SAYS THE NUMBERS THAT
SUPPORTERS POINT TO ONLY TELL
PART OF THE STORY AND THAT
SIMILAR STUDENTS WITHOUT THE
EXTRA HOUR OF READING ALSO
SHOWED IMPROVEMENT OVER THE SAME
TIME PERIOD.
IF SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAPPENS
AND IT HELPS ANYBODY, ISN’T IT
WORTH CONTINUING AND TRYING?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK FEW PEOPLE
WOULD DISAGREE WITH THE FACT
THAT WE’RE GOING TO GIVE KIDS
WHO MAY BE LOW READERS EXTRA
TIME TO READ.
BUT THERE’S A CONSEQUENCE TO
THAT.
YOU MAY IN FACT DRIVE UP A
READING SCORE, BUT YOU ALSO LOSE
OTHER... OTHER FEATURES AS WELL.
IF THEY’D GAVE US SOME OPTIONS,
THAT SAME MONEY WOULD BUY SEVEN
TEACHERS PER SCHOOL.
YOU COULD REDUCE CLASS SIZE.
IT WOULD HAVE BOUGHT 14
PARAPROFESSIONALS.
YOU COULD’VE EXTENDED THE YEAR
BY 20 DAYS AND KEPT THE SAME
NUMBER OF HOURS IF YOU LET LOCAL
CONTROL COME INTO PLAY FOR THE
SAME MONEY.
>> Reporter: THE CRITICISM I’VE
HEARD FROM A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
FOLKS WHO ARE INVOLVED IN
EDUCATION, THAT THEY WORK ON THE
LOCAL LEVEL.
THEY’RE IN THE SCHOOLS.
AND THE IDEA THAT THEY HAVE TO
TAKE THIS MONEY, COME UP WITH IT
AND PUT IT JUST ON READING,
EVERYBODY SUPPORTS READING BUT
PERHAPS THAT’S NOT WHAT THEIR
SCHOOL NEEDS.
IF THE VAST MAJORITY OF YOUR
STUDENTS HAVE ON OUR TESTS, YOU
KNOW, STANDARDIZED TESTS, SHOWN
THAT THEY CANNOT READ AT GRADE
LEVEL, THEN THEY NEED READING
INSTRUCTION.
THAT’S A SIMPLE FACT OF LIFE.
>> THUMBS UP IF YOU REMEMBER AND
YOU UNDERSTAND.
>> Reporter: AND THERE’S STILL
THE ISSUE OF FUNDING; WHO PAYS
FOR IT NOW AND IN THE FUTURE?
WHAT WOULD IT TAKE FOR THIS
PROGRAM TO BE GUARANTEED
FUNDING?
RIGHT NOW IT’S YEAR TO YEAR TO
YEAR, IF THE DISTRICT CAN COME
UP WITH THE MONEY.
>> I CAN TELL YOU THAT IT IS MY
COMMITMENT, NOW THAT WE ARE
SEEING THE PERFORMANCE THAT...
THAT WE WILL IN FACT DEDICATE
THE FUNDING FOR THIS IN ORDER TO
GET THIS ACCOMPLISHED.
>> IN MY HEART, I KNEW THAT IF
WE CAN KEEP THE STUDENTS HERE
LONGER, WE CAN ACTUALLY MAKE A
DIFFERENCE.
>> ALRIGHT, YA’LL LOOK FABULOUS.
>> Reporter: AMIDST THE DEBATE,
PRINCIPAL SEAN BROWN IS
COMMITTED TO KEEPING THE EXTRA
HOUR, AND EVEN SOUGHT A FEDERAL
GRANT TO MAKE SURE WHEATLEY CAN
KEEP THAT TIME-- WHETHER
MANDATED TO, OR NOT.
AND IT ISN’T LOST ON ANYONE THAT
THE SCHOOL IS NAMED AFTER
PHILLIS WHEATLEY.
SHE WAS BROUGHT TO AMERICA A
SLAVE, BUT BECAME A GREAT
WRITER, THE FIRST BLACK WOMAN
POET TO BE PUBLISHED.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW MUCH DOES
EXTRA READING TIME HELP, AND
WHAT ARE OTHER STATES DOING TO
IMPROVE READING PROFICIENCY?
EARLIER I SPOKE WITH PATTI
BARTH, THE DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTER FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION IN
WASHINGTON.
WE ALWAYS HEAR ABOUT THIS THIRD
GRADE THRESHOLD, THAT IT’S
REALLY IMPORTANT TO TRY TO GET A
KID UP TO GRADE LEVEL BY THIRD
GRADE-- WHY?
>> WELL, A LOT OF RESEARCH
SUGGESTS THAT THIRD GRADE
READING IS A THRESHOLD YEAR.
SOME STUDIES SAY THAT THE
LIKELIHOOD OF A THIRD GRADER WHO
IS NOT READING ON GRADE LEVEL
HAS A LIKELIHOOD OF DROPPING OUT
THAT IS THREE OR FOUR TIMES
GREATER THAN A CHILD WHO IS
READING ON GRADE LEVEL.
SO THERE’S A LOT AT STAKE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IN ADDITION
TO THE EXTRA HOUR OF READING
TIME, WHAT ARE SOME OTHER STATES
DOING?
A WHAT ARE SOME DIFFERENT
TECHNIQUES TO TRY TO GET KIDS UP
TO SPEED?
>> WELL, THE IMPORTANCE OF THIRD
GRADE READING IS SO HIGH THAT WE
HAVE-- OVER 30 STATES HAVE SOME
KIND OF POLICY TO INTERVENE,
IDENTIFY, AND MAKE SURE CHILDREN
GET THE SUPPORT THEY NEED TO BE
ON GRADE LEVEL.
THEY DO TAKE DIFFERENT FORMS.
ABOUT 15 STATES REQUIRE THAT A
THIRD GRADER WHO IS NOT READING
ON GRADE LEVEL WILL BE RETAINED.
NOW, THAT’S A RATHER
CONTROVERSIAL POLICY, BECAUSE
THERE’S OTHER RESEARCH THAT
POINTS TO GRADE RETENTION AS A
PREDICTOR OF LATER DROPPING OUT.
BUT IN DOING SO, IN MAKING THAT
POLICY, THOSE STATES ALSO PUT
PRESSURE ON THE SYSTEM TO
PROVIDE EARLY INTERVENTIONS,
MAKE SURE THAT KIDS HAVE THE
SUPPORT SO THAT THEY ARE ON
GRADE LEVEL AND THEY ARE NOT
RETAINED AND THEY CAN MOVE ON TO
FOURTH GRADE WITH THEIR PEERS.
OTHER STATES REQUIRE SUMMER
SCHOOL.
SOME STATES REQUIRE AFTER-HOURS
INSTRUCTION, WHETHER AFTER
SCHOOL OR ON SATURDAY FOR
STUDENTS WHO HAVE BEEN
IDENTIFIED AS READING.
SOME HAVE AT-HOME READING
PROGRAMS THAT THEY WORK WITH
PARENTS WITH.
SO THERE’S A RANGE OF
INTERVENTIONS THAT STATES ARE
TRYING TO PROVIDE FOR THEIR
CHILDREN TO MAKE SURE THAT
EVERYBODY IS ON TRACK, READING
ON GRADE LEVEL, AND ABLE TO
SUCCEED IN FOURTH GRADE AND
BEYOND.
>> Sreenivasan: SO INCREASING
THE AMOUNT OF TIME SPEND READING
DURING THE DAY, DOES THAT WORK?
>> INTERESTING ABOUT TIME IS
THAT, DOES IT WORK?
WELL, I’LL GIVE IT A QUALIFIED
YES.
IT WORKS BUT IT DOES DEPEND ON
HOW THAT TIME IS USED.
SO IF YOU JUST MERELY INCREASE
THE TIME DURING THE DAY AND DO
NOTHING ELSE, YOU NEED TO KNOW
HOW YOU’RE GOING TO FILL THAT.
IS THAT FILLED WITH QUALITY
INSTRUCTION?
IS THAT STAFFED WITH QUALIFIED
PEOPLE?
AND SOMETHING ELSE I ALWAYS
LIKE TO CAUTION PEOPLE ABOUT,
WHEN YOU’RE TALKING ABOUT ADDING
TIME TO THE SCHOOL DAY OF YOUNG
CHILDREN, LITTLE KIDS GET TIRED.
SO YOU NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEY’RE ALSO GETTING SOME RECESS
DURING THE DAY, THAT THEY HAVE
SNACKS AND THAT THEY’RE ENGAGED.
WHEN ALL OF THOSE PIECES ARE IN
PLACE WE HAVE SEEN IT DOES MAKE
A DIFFERENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
COST INVESTMENT?
OBVIOUSLY, IT COSTS MORE MONEY
AND WOULD THAT MONEY, SAY, BE
BETTER SPENT HIRING MORE
TEACHERS OR USED DIFFERENTLY?
>> YOU’RE RIGHT TO POINT OUT IT
IS VERY COSTLY BECAUSE IT DOES
REQUIRE EXTRA STAFFING.
IT REQUIRES MORE TIME THAT
BUILDINGS ARE OPEN,
TRANSPORTATION COSTS AND SO
FORTH.
SO ADDING TIME CAN BE ONE OF THE
MOST EXPENSIVE INVESTMENTS THAT
A STATE OR DISTRICT MAKES IN
THEIR PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
THERE ARE OTHER WAYS TO INVEST
THAT MONEY, AS YOU POINT OUT.
YOU KNOW, THE RESEARCH ON THE
QUALITY OF TEACHERS AND
INSTRUCTION IS VERY, VERY
COMPELLING ABOUT THE IMPACT THAT
CAN HAVE ON STUDENT LEARNING.
INVESTMENTS IN THE LEADERSHIP,
THE PRINCIPAL CAN MAKE A LOT OF
DIFFERENCE, AND THE QUALITY OF
THE CURRICULUM.
ALL OF THESE PIECES ARE
INGREDIENTS IN PROVIDING A
PUBLIC EDUCATION THAT WILL MAKE
SURE ALL STUDENTS ARE SUCCEEDING
AND WILL THRIVE AFTER HIGH
SCHOOL.
HOW YOU INVEST THOSE, THERE’S NO
MAGIC FORMULA.
AND THAT’S ONE OF THE BENEFITS
WE HAVE IN THIS COUNTRY.
WE DON’T HAVE A SINGLE SYSTEM.
WE HAVE 50 STATE SYSTEMS.
WITHIN THAT WE HAVE 14,000
SCHOOL DISTRICTS.
AND SO ALL OF THEM-- AND EACH OF
THEM-- CAN TAKE DIFFERENT
APPROACHES TO THIS IN PUTTING
THIS RECIPE TOGETHER.
AND THEY DO.
WHEN THEY DO THAT, AS
RESEARCHERS, WE CAN LEARN WHAT
IS WORKING BEST.
WE CAN SHARE THAT INFORMATION
AND LEARN FROM EACH OTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
PATTI BARTH, THE DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTER FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
FOR MORE OF OUR IN-DEPTH
REPORTING ON EDUCATION AROUND
THE COUNTRY, AND FOR ALL OF OUR
COVERAGE OF THIS YEAR’S AMERICAN
GRADUATE DAY, FOLLOW OUR BLOG AT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
JAMES TRAFICANT, THE OHIO
DEMOCRAT EXPELLED FROM CONGRESS
IN 2002, DIED TODAY FOLLOWING A
FARM ACCIDENT.
HE WAS CONVICTED ON CORRUPTION
CHARGES AND BECAME ONLY THE
SECOND CONGRESSMAN EXPELLED
SINCE THE CIVIL WAR.
A TRAFICANT WAS 73 YEARS OLD.
BERNICE DAWN, WHO HAS HELPED
SPEARHEAD LIBERIA’S EFFORTS TO
CURB EBOLA HAS PLACED HERSELF
UNDER QUARANTINE AFTER HER
OFFICE ASSISTANT DIED OF THE
DISEASE.
THE EBOLA DEATH COUNT IN WEST
AFRICA NOW EXCEEDS 3,000.
SEVEN PEOPLE ARE REPORTED
MISSING AFTER A VOLCANO ERUPTED
IN JAPAN TODAY.
MORE THAN 30 OTHERS SUFFERED
SERIOUS INJURIES WHILE DOZENS
MORE AWAIT RESCUE IN MOUNTAIN
LODGES.
TOMORROW, JEFF GREENFIELD
REPORTS FROM KANSAS ON THE RACE
THAT COULD DETERMINE WHO
CONTROLS THE U.S. SENATE.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US ON THIS
AMERICAN GRADUATE DAY
BROADCAST.